\input texinfo
@documentencoding UTF-8

@ifnottex
@paragraphindent 0
@end ifnottex
@titlepage
@title Libreboot release information
@end titlepage

@node Top
@top Libreboot release information

@menu
* Libreboot release information::
* Release YYYYMMDD::
@end menu

@node Libreboot release information
@chapter Libreboot release information
@anchor{#libreboot-release-information}
Updated versions of libreboot can be found at @uref{http://libreboot.org/,libreboot.org}.
@menu
* Old releases::
@end menu

@node Old releases
@section Old releases
@anchor{#old-releases}
See @uref{archive_old.html,archive_old.html} for information about older libreboot releases.

@node Release YYYYMMDD
@chapter Release YYYYMMDD
@anchor{#release-yyyymmdd}
Release date: Day Month Year.

Installation instructions can be found at @strong{@emph{install/index.html}}. Building instructions (for source code) can be found at @strong{@emph{git/index.html#build}}.
@menu
* Machines supported in this release::
* Changes for this release relative to r20150518 earliest changes last recent changes first::
@end menu

@node Machines supported in this release
@section Machines supported in this release:
@anchor{#machines-supported-in-this-release}
@itemize
@item
@strong{ASUS Chromebook C201}
@itemize
@item
Check notes in @strong{@emph{hcl/c201.html}}
@item
NOTE: not in libreboot 20150518. Only in git. for now.
@end itemize

@item
@strong{Gigabyte GA-G41M-ES2L desktop board}
@itemize
@item
Check notes in @strong{@emph{hcl/ga-g41m-es2l.html}}
@item
@strong{NOTE: not in libreboot 20150518. Only in git, for now.}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{Intel D510MO desktop board}
@itemize
@item
Check notes in @strong{@emph{hcl/d510mo.html}}
@item
@strong{NOTE: not in libreboot 20150518. Only in git, for now.}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ASUS KFSN4-DRE server board}
@itemize
@item
PCB revision 1.05G is the best version (can use 6-core CPUs)
@item
Check notes in @strong{@emph{hcl/kfsn4-dre.html}}
@item
@strong{NOTE: not in libreboot 20150518. Only in git, for now.}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ASUS KGPE-D16 server board}
@itemize
@item
Check notes in @strong{@emph{hcl/kgpe-d16.html}}
@item
@strong{NOTE: not in libreboot 20150518. Only in git, for now.}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ASUS KCMA-D8 desktop/workstation board}
@itemize
@item
Check notes in @strong{@emph{hcl/kcma-d8.html}}
@item
@strong{NOTE: not in libreboot 20150518. Only in git, for now.}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ThinkPad X60/X60s}
@itemize
@item
You can also remove the motherboard from an X61/X61s and replace it with an X60/X60s motherboard. An X60 Tablet motherboard will also fit inside an X60/X60s.
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ThinkPad X60 Tablet} (1024x768 and 1400x1050) with digitizer support
@itemize
@item
See @strong{@emph{hcl/index.html#supported_x60t_list}} for list of supported LCD panels
@item
It is unknown whether an X61 Tablet can have it's mainboard replaced with an X60 Tablet motherboard.
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ThinkPad T60} (Intel GPU) (there are issues; see below):
@itemize
@item
See notes below for exceptions, and @strong{@emph{hcl/index.html#supported_t60_list}} for known working LCD panels.
@item
It is unknown whether a T61 can have it's mainboard replaced with a T60 motherboard.
@item
See @strong{@emph{future/index.html#t60_cpu_microcode}}.
@item
T60P (and T60 laptops with ATI GPU) will likely never be supported: @strong{@emph{hcl/index.html#t60_ati_intel}}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ThinkPad X200}
@itemize
@item
X200S and X200 Tablet are also supported, conditionally; see @strong{@emph{hcl/x200.html#x200s}}
@item
@strong{ME/AMT}: libreboot removes this, permanently. @strong{@emph{hcl/gm45_remove_me.html}}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ThinkPad R400}
@itemize
@item
See @strong{@emph{hcl/r400.html}}
@item
@strong{ME/AMT}: libreboot removes this, permanently. @strong{@emph{hcl/gm45_remove_me.html}}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ThinkPad T400}
@itemize
@item
See @strong{@emph{hcl/t400.html}}
@item
@strong{ME/AMT}: libreboot removes this, permanently. @strong{@emph{hcl/gm45_remove_me.html}}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{ThinkPad T500}
@itemize
@item
See @strong{@emph{hcl/t500.html}}
@item
@strong{ME/AMT}: libreboot removes this, permanently. @strong{@emph{hcl/gm45_remove_me.html}}
@end itemize

@item
@strong{Apple MacBook1,1} (MA255LL/A, MA254LL/A, MA472LL/A)
@itemize
@item
See @strong{@emph{hcl/index.html#macbook11}}.
@end itemize

@item
@strong{Apple MacBook2,1} (MA699LL/A, MA701LL/A, MB061LL/A, MA700LL/A, MB063LL/A, MB062LL/A)
@itemize
@item
See @strong{@emph{hcl/index.html#macbook21}}.
@end itemize

@end itemize

@node Changes for this release relative to r20150518 earliest changes last recent changes first
@section Changes for this release, relative to r20150518 (earliest changes last, recent changes first)
@anchor{#changes-for-this-release-relative-to-r20150518-earliest-changes-last-recent-changes-first}
@itemize
@item
Changelog not yet generated. Clone the git repository and check the git logs
@end itemize

Copyright © 2014, 2015, 2016 Minifree Ltd <info@@minifree.org>@* Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license can be found at @uref{resources/licenses/gfdl-1.3.txt,gfdl-1.3.txt}

Updated versions of the license (when available) can be found at @uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html,https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html}

UNLESS OTHERWISE SEPARATELY UNDERTAKEN BY THE LICENSOR, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE LICENSOR OFFERS THE LICENSED MATERIAL AS-IS AND AS-AVAILABLE, AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE LICENSED MATERIAL, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHER. THIS INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT KNOWN OR DISCOVERABLE. WHERE DISCLAIMERS OF WARRANTIES ARE NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS DISCLAIMER MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, IN NO EVENT WILL THE LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, NEGLIGENCE) OR OTHERWISE FOR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE, EXEMPLARY, OR OTHER LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS PUBLIC LICENSE OR USE OF THE LICENSED MATERIAL, EVEN IF THE LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES. WHERE A LIMITATION OF LIABILITY IS NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability.

@bye
