\input texinfo
@documentencoding UTF-8

@ifnottex
@paragraphindent 0
@end ifnottex
@titlepage
@title ThinkPad T500
@end titlepage

@node Top
@top ThinkPad T500

@menu
* ThinkPad T500::
* LCD compatibly::
@end menu

@node ThinkPad T500
@chapter ThinkPad T500
@anchor{#thinkpad-t500}
It is believed that all or most T500 laptops are compatible. See notes about @uref{../install/t500_external.html#cpu_compatibility,CPU compatibility} for potential incompatibilities.

There are two possible flash chip sizes for the T500: 4MiB (32Mbit) or 8MiB (64Mbit). This can be identified by the type of flash chip below the palmrest: 4MiB is SOIC-8, 8MiB is SOIC-16.

@strong{The T500 laptops come with the ME (and sometimes AMT in addition) before flashing libreboot. Libreboot disables and removes it by using a modified descriptor: see @uref{gm45_remove_me.html,gm45_remove_me.html}} (contains notes, plus instructions)

Flashing instructions can be found at @uref{../install/index.html#flashrom,../install/index.html#flashrom}

@uref{index.html,Back to previous index}.
@menu
* Compatibility without blobs::
@end menu

@node Compatibility without blobs
@section Compatibility (without blobs)
@anchor{#compatibility-without-blobs}
@menu
* Hardware virtualization vt-x::
@end menu

@node Hardware virtualization vt-x
@subsection Hardware virtualization (vt-x)
@anchor{#hardware-virtualization-vt-x}
The T500, when run without CPU microcode updates in coreboot, currently kernel panics if running QEMU with vt-x enabled on 2 cores for the guest. With a single core enabled for the guest, the guest panics (but the host is fine). Working around this in QEMU might be possible; if not, software virtualization should work fine (it's just slower).

On GM45 hardware (with libreboot), make sure that the @emph{kvm} and @emph{kvm_intel} kernel modules are not loaded, when using QEMU.

The following errata datasheet from Intel might help with investigation: @uref{http://download.intel.com/design/mobile/specupdt/320121.pdf,http://download.intel.com/design/mobile/specupdt/320121.pdf}

The T500 is almost identical to the X200, code-wise. See @uref{x200.html,x200.html}.

@node LCD compatibly
@chapter LCD compatibly
@anchor{#lcd-compatibly}
Not all LCD panels are compatible yet. See @uref{gm45_lcd.html,gm45_lcd.html}.
@menu
* Descriptor and Gbe differences::
* Hardware register dumps::
@end menu

@node Descriptor and Gbe differences
@section Descriptor and Gbe differences
@anchor{#descriptor-and-gbe-differences}
See @uref{../future/dumps/t500_x200_descriptor/descriptor_diff_t500_x200.txt,../future/dumps/t500_x200_descriptor/descriptor_diff_t500_x200.txt} and @uref{../future/dumps/t500_x200_descriptor/gbe_diff_t500_x200.txt,../future/dumps/t500_x200_descriptor/gbe_diff_t500_x200.txt}

The patches above are based on the output from ich9deblob on a factory.rom image dumped from the T500 with a SOIC-8 4MiB flash chip. The patch re-creates the X200 descriptor/gbe source, so the commands were something like:@* $ @strong{diff -u t500gbe x200gbe}@* $ @strong{diff -u t500descriptor x200descriptor}

ME VSCC table is in a different place and a different size on the T500. Libreboot disables and removes the ME anyway, so it doesn't matter.

The very same descriptor/gbe used on the X200 (generated by @uref{gm45_remove_me.html#ich9gen,ich9gen}) was re-used on the T500, and it still worked.

@node Hardware register dumps
@section Hardware register dumps
@anchor{#hardware-register-dumps}
The coreboot wiki @uref{http://www.coreboot.org/Motherboard_Porting_Guide,shows} how to collect various logs useful in porting to new boards. Following are outputs from the T500:

@itemize
@item
T500 with @strong{Macronix MX25L3205D} flash chip (4MiB, SOIC-8) and Lenovo BIOS 3.13 7VET83WW (EC firmware 1.06):
@itemize
@item
@uref{../future/dumps/t500log/,../future/dumps/t500log/}
@end itemize

@end itemize

Copyright © 2015 Francis Rowe <info@@gluglug.org.uk>@* Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license can be found at @uref{../gfdl-1.3.txt,../gfdl-1.3.txt}

Updated versions of the license (when available) can be found at @uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html,https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html}

UNLESS OTHERWISE SEPARATELY UNDERTAKEN BY THE LICENSOR, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE LICENSOR OFFERS THE LICENSED MATERIAL AS-IS AND AS-AVAILABLE, AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE LICENSED MATERIAL, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHER. THIS INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT KNOWN OR DISCOVERABLE. WHERE DISCLAIMERS OF WARRANTIES ARE NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS DISCLAIMER MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, IN NO EVENT WILL THE LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, NEGLIGENCE) OR OTHERWISE FOR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE, EXEMPLARY, OR OTHER LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS PUBLIC LICENSE OR USE OF THE LICENSED MATERIAL, EVEN IF THE LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES. WHERE A LIMITATION OF LIABILITY IS NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability.

@bye
