
ThinkPad X200 
=============

It is believed that all X200 laptops are compatible. X200S and X200
Tablet will also work, [depending on the configuration](#x200s).

It \*might\* be possible to put an X200 motherboard in an X201 chassis,
though this is currently untested by the libreboot project. The same may
also apply between X200S and X201S; again, this is untested. **It's
most likely true.**

There are two possible flash chip sizes for the X200: 4MiB (32Mbit) or
8MiB (64Mbit). This can be identified by the type of flash chip below
the palmrest: 4MiB is SOIC-8, 8MiB is SOIC-16.

**The X200 laptops come with the ME (and sometimes AMT in addition)
before flashing libreboot. Libreboot disables and removes it by using a
modified descriptor: see [gm45\_remove\_me.html](gm45_remove_me.html)**
(contains notes, plus instructions)

Flashing instructions can be found at
[../install/\#flashrom](../install/#flashrom)

[Back to previous index](./).



EC update {#ecupdate}
=========

It is recommended that you update to the latest EC firmware version. The
[EC firmware](https://libreboot.org/faq/#firmware-ec) is separate from
libreboot, so we don't actually provide that, but if you still have
Lenovo BIOS then you can just run the Lenovo BIOS update utility, which
will update both the BIOS and EC version. See:

-   <https://libreboot.org/docs/install/index.html#flashrom>
-   <http://www.thinkwiki.org/wiki/BIOS_update_without_optical_disk>

NOTE: this can only be done when you are using Lenovo BIOS. How to
update the EC firmware while running libreboot is unknown. Libreboot
only replaces the BIOS firmware, not EC.

Updated EC firmware has several advantages e.g. bettery battery
handling.



Compatibility (without blobs) {#compatibility_noblobs}
-----------------------------


### Hardware virtualization (vt-x) {#hwvirt}

The X200, when run without CPU microcode updates in coreboot, currently
kernel panics if running QEMU with vt-x enabled on 2 cores for the
guest. With a single core enabled for the guest, the guest panics (but
the host is fine). Working around this in QEMU might be possible; if
not, software virtualization should work fine (it's just slower).

On GM45 hardware (with libreboot), make sure that the *kvm* and
*kvm\_intel* kernel modules are not loaded, when using QEMU.

The following errata datasheet from Intel might help with investigation:
<http://download.intel.com/design/mobile/specupdt/320121.pdf>

Anecdotal reports from at least 1 user suggests that some models with
CPU microcode 1067a (on the CPU itself) might work with vt-x in
libreboot.




X200S and X200 Tablet. {#x200s}
----------------------

X200S and X200 Tablet have raminit issues at the time of writing (GS45
chipset. X200 uses GM45).

X200S and X200 Tablet are known to work, but only with certain CPU+RAM
configurations. The current stumbling block is RCOMP and SFF, mentioned
in <https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~410/doc/minimal_boot.pdf>.

The issues mostly relate to raminit (memory initialization). With an
unpatched coreboot, you get the following:
[text/x200s/cblog00.txt](text/x200s/cblog00.txt). No SODIMM combination
that was tested would work. At first glance, it looks like GS45 (chipset
that X200S uses. X200 uses GM45) is unsupported, but there is a
workaround that can be used to make certain models of the X200S work,
depending on the RAM.

The datasheet for GS45 describes two modes: low-performance and
high-performance. Low performance uses the SU range of ultra-low voltage
procesors (SU9400, for example), and high-performance uses the SL range
of processors (SL9400, for example). According to datasheets, GS45
behaves very similarly to GM45 when operating in high-performance mode.

The theory then was that you could simply remove the checks in coreboot
and make it pass GS45 off as GM45; the idea is that, with a
high-performance mode CPU (SL9400, for example) it would just boot up
and work.

This suspicion was confirmed with the following log:
[text/x200s/cblog01.txt](text/x200s/cblog01.txt). The memory modules in
this case are 2x4GB. ~~**However, not all configurations work:
[text/x200s/cblog02.txt](text/x200s/cblog02.txt) (2x2GB) and
[text/x200s/cblog03.txt](text/x200s/cblog03.txt) (1x2GB) show a failed
bootup.**~~ *False alarm. The modules were mixed (non-matching). X200S
with high-performance mode CPU will work so long as you use matching
memory modules (doesn't matter what size).*

This was then pushed as a patch for coreboot, which can be found at
<http://review.coreboot.org/#/c/7786/> (libreboot merges this patch in
coreboot-libre now. Check the 'getcb' script in src or git).


### Proper GS45 raminit {#x200s_raminit}

A new northbridge gs45 should be added to coreboot, based on gm45, and a
new port x200st (X200S and X200T) should be added based on the x200
port.

This port would have proper raminit. Alternatively, gs45 (if raminit is
taken to be the only issue with it) can be part of gm45 northbridge
support (and X200S/Tablet being part of the X200 port) with conditional
checks in the raminit that make raminit work differently (as required)
for GS45. nico\_h and pgeorgi/patrickg in the coreboot IRC channel
should know more about raminit on gm45 and likely gs45.

pgeorgi recommends to run SerialICE on the factory BIOS (for X200S),
comparing it with X200 (factory BIOS) and X200 (gm45 raminit code in
coreboot), to see what the differences are. Then tweak raminit code
based on that.




Trouble undocking (button doesn't work)
----------------------------------------

This person seems to have a workaround:
<https://github.com/the-unconventional/libreboot-undock>



LCD compatibility list {#lcd_supported_list}
----------------------

LCD panel list (X200 panels listed there):
<http://www.thinkwiki.org/wiki/TFT_display>

All LCD panels for the X200, X200S and X200 Tablet are known to work.

[Back to top of page.](#pagetop)


### AFFS/IPS panels {#ips}

#### X200

Adapted from
<https://github.com/bibanon/Coreboot-ThinkPads/wiki/ThinkPad-X200>

Look at wikipedia for difference between TN and IPS panels. IPS have
much better colour/contrast than a regular TN, and will typically have
good viewing angles.

These seem to be from the X200 tablet. You need to find one without the
glass touchscreen protection on it (might be able to remove it, though).
It also must not have a digitizer on it (again, might be possible to
just simply remove the digitizer).

-   BOE-Hydis HV121WX4-120, HV121WX4-110 or HV121WX4-100 - cheap-ish,
    might be hard to find
-   Samsung LTN121AP02-001 - common to find, cheap

**If your X200 has an LED backlit panel in it, then you also need to get
an inverter and harness cable that is compatible with the CCFL panels.
To see which panel type you have, see
[\#led\_howtotell](#led_howtotell). If you need the inverter/cable, here
are part numbers: 44C9909 for CCFL LVDS cable with bluetooth and camera
connections, and 42W8009 or 42W8010 for the inverter.**

There are glossy and matte versions of these. Matte means anti-glare,
which is what you want (in this authors opinion).

Refer to the HMM (hardware maintenance manual) for how to replace the
screen.

Sources:

-   [ThinkPad Forums - Matte AFFS Panel on
    X200](http://forum.thinkpads.com/viewtopic.php?f=2&t=84941)
-   [ThinkPad Forums - Parts for X200 AFFS
    Mod](http://forum.thinkpads.com/viewtopic.php?p=660662#p660662)
-   [ThinkWiki.de - X200
    Displayumbau](http://thinkwiki.de/X200_Displayumbau)



### X200S

<http://forum.thinkpads.com/viewtopic.php?p=618928#p618928> explains
that the X200S screens/assemblies are thinner. You need to replace the
whole lid with one from a normal X200/X201.


[Back to top of page.](#pagetop)



How to tell if it has an LED or CCFL? {#led_howtotell}
-------------------------------------

Some X200s have a CCFL backlight and some have an LED backlight, in
their LCD panel. This also means that the inverters will vary, so you
must be careful if ever replacing either the panel and/or inverter. (a
CCFL inverter is high-voltage and will destroy an LED backlit panel).

CCFLs contain mercury. An X200 with a CCFL backlight will (****unless it
has been changed to an LED, with the correct inverter. Check with your
supplier!) the following: *"This product contains Lithium Ion Battery,
Lithium Battery and a lamp which contains mercury; dispose according to
local, state or federal laws"* (one with an LED backlit panel will say
something different).

[Back to top of page.](#pagetop)



Hardware register dumps {#regdumps}
-----------------------

The coreboot wiki
[shows](http://www.coreboot.org/Motherboard_Porting_Guide) how to
collect various logs useful in porting to new boards. Following are
outputs from the X200:

-   BIOS 3.15, EC 1.06
    -   [hwdumps/x200/](hwdumps/x200/)



RAM, S3 and microcode updates {#ram_s3_microcode}
=============================

Not all memory modules work. Most of the default ones do, but you have
to be careful when upgrading to 8GiB; some modules work, some don't.

Someone on reddit also did their own research on RAM compatibility: [on
this
post](https://www.reddit.com/r/libreboot/comments/5ax17e/liberated_x200_is_really_picky_with_memory/)

[This page](http://www.forum.thinkpads.com/viewtopic.php?p=760721) might
be useful for RAM compatibility info (note: coreboot raminit is
different, so this page might be BS)

pehjota started collecting some steppings for different CPUs on several
X200 laptops. You can get the CPUID by running:\
\$ **dmesg | sed -n 's/\^.\* microcode: CPU0
sig=0x\\(\[\^,\]\*\\),.\*\$/\\1/p'**

What pehjota wrote: The laptops that have issues resuming from suspend,
as well as a laptop that (as I mentioned earlier in \#libreboot) won't
boot with any Samsung DIMMs, all have CPUID 0x10676 (stepping M0).

What pehjota wrote: Laptops with CPUID 0x167A (stepping R0) resume
properly every time and work with Samsung DIMMs. I'll need to do more
testing on more units to better confirm these trends, but it looks like
the M0 microcode is very buggy. That would also explain why I didn't
have issues with Samsung DIMMs with the Lenovo BIOS (which would have
microcode updates). I wonder if VT-x works on R0.

What pehjota wrote: As I said, 10676 is M0 and 1067A is R0; those are
the two CPUIDs and steppings for Intel Core 2 Duo P8xxx CPUs with
factory microcode. (1067 is the family and model, and 6 or A is the
stepping ID.)

**TODO: check the CPUIDs and test S3 resume and/or KVM on any C2D
systems (including non-P8xxx ones, which I don't have here) you have
available. I'd be curious if you could confirm these results.** It
might not be coreboot that's buggy with raminit/S3; it might just be
down to the microcode updates.



Unsorted notes {#unsorted}
--------------

    <sgsit> do you know if it's possible to flash thinkpads over the LPC debug connector at the front edge?
    <sgsit> that would make life much easier for systems like this
    <sgsit> all the Wistron manufactured systems have this thing called a "golden finger", normally at the front edge of the board
    <sgsit> you can plug a board in which gives diagnostic codes but i'm wondering whether it is capable of more
    <sgsit> http://www.endeer.cz/bios.tools/bios.html



Copyright © 2014, 2015 Leah Rowe <info@minifree.org>\
Copyright © 2015 Patrick "P. J." McDermott <pj@pehjota.net>\
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0
International license or any later version published by Creative
Commons; A copy of the license can be found at
[../cc-by-sa-4.0.txt](../cc-by-sa-4.0.txt)

Updated versions of the license (when available) can be found at
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/legalcode>

UNLESS OTHERWISE SEPARATELY UNDERTAKEN BY THE LICENSOR, TO THE EXTENT
POSSIBLE, THE LICENSOR OFFERS THE LICENSED MATERIAL AS-IS AND
AS-AVAILABLE, AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND
CONCERNING THE LICENSED MATERIAL, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY,
OR OTHER. THIS INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE,
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT,
ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE
OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT KNOWN OR DISCOVERABLE. WHERE DISCLAIMERS OF
WARRANTIES ARE NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS DISCLAIMER MAY NOT
APPLY TO YOU.

TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, IN NO EVENT WILL THE LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU
ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, NEGLIGENCE) OR
OTHERWISE FOR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE, EXEMPLARY, OR OTHER LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES
ARISING OUT OF THIS PUBLIC LICENSE OR USE OF THE LICENSED MATERIAL, EVEN
IF THE LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSSES,
COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES. WHERE A LIMITATION OF LIABILITY IS NOT
ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above
shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most
closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability.

