\input texinfo
@documentencoding UTF-8

@ifnottex
@paragraphindent 0
@end ifnottex
@titlepage
@title KGPE-D16 external flashing instructions
@end titlepage

@node Top
@top KGPE-D16 external flashing instructions

@menu
* KGPE-D16 external flashing instructions::
* KGPE-D16 boards and full systems with libreboot preinstalled::
* External programmer::
@end menu

@node KGPE-D16 external flashing instructions
@chapter KGPE-D16 external flashing instructions
@anchor{#kgpe-d16-external-flashing-instructions}
Initial flashing instructions for X200.

This guide is for those who want libreboot on their ThinkPad X200 while they still have the original Lenovo BIOS present. This guide can also be followed (adapted) if you brick your X200, to know how to recover.

This guide is for those who want libreboot on their ASUS KGPE-D16 motherboard, while they still have the proprietary ASUS BIOS present. This guide can also be followed (adapted) if you brick you board, to know how to recover.

For more general information about this board, refer to @uref{../hcl/kgpe-d16.html,../hcl/kgpe-d16.html}.

TODO: show photos here, and other info.

@itemize
@item
@ref{#preinstall,KGPE-D16 boards (and full systems) with libreboot preinstalled}
@item
@ref{#programmer,External programmer}
@end itemize

@uref{index.html,Back to main index}

@node KGPE-D16 boards and full systems with libreboot preinstalled
@chapter KGPE-D16 boards (and full systems) with libreboot preinstalled
@anchor{#kgpe-d16-boards-and-full-systems-with-libreboot-preinstalled}
If you don't want to install libreboot yourself, companies exist that sell these boards with libreboot pre-installed, along with a free GNU/Linux distribution.

Check the @uref{../../suppliers,suppliers} page for more information.

@node External programmer
@chapter External programmer
@anchor{#external-programmer}
Refer to @uref{bbb_setup.html,bbb_setup.html} for a guide on how to set up an external SPI programmer.

The flash chip is in a PDIP 8 socket (SPI flash chip) on the motherboard, which you take out and then re-flash with libreboot, using the programmer. @strong{DO NOT} remove the chip with your hands. Use a chip extractor tool.

Copyright © 2015 Francis Rowe <info@@gluglug.org.uk>@* Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license can be found at @uref{../resources/licenses/gfdl-1.3.txt,gfdl-1.3.txt}

Updated versions of the license (when available) can be found at @uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html,https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html}

UNLESS OTHERWISE SEPARATELY UNDERTAKEN BY THE LICENSOR, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE LICENSOR OFFERS THE LICENSED MATERIAL AS-IS AND AS-AVAILABLE, AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE LICENSED MATERIAL, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHER. THIS INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT KNOWN OR DISCOVERABLE. WHERE DISCLAIMERS OF WARRANTIES ARE NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS DISCLAIMER MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, IN NO EVENT WILL THE LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, NEGLIGENCE) OR OTHERWISE FOR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE, EXEMPLARY, OR OTHER LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS PUBLIC LICENSE OR USE OF THE LICENSED MATERIAL, EVEN IF THE LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES. WHERE A LIMITATION OF LIABILITY IS NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability.

@bye
