\input texinfo
@documentencoding UTF-8

@ifnottex
@paragraphindent 0
@end ifnottex
@titlepage
@title ASUS KFSN4-DRE server/workstation board
@end titlepage

@node Top
@top ASUS KFSN4-DRE server/workstation board

@menu
* ASUS KFSN4-DRE server/workstation board::
* Form factor::
* Flash chips::
* Native graphics initialization::
* Memory::
* Hex-core CPUs::
* Current issues::
* Other information::
@end menu

@node ASUS KFSN4-DRE server/workstation board
@chapter ASUS KFSN4-DRE server/workstation board
@anchor{#asus-kfsn4-dre-serverworkstation-board}
This is a server board using AMD hardware (Fam10h). It can also be used for building a high-powered workstation. Powered by libreboot.

@strong{NOTE: This board is unsupported in libreboot 20150518. To use it in libreboot, for now, you must build for it from source using the libreboot git repository.}

Flashing instructions can be found at @uref{../install/index.html#flashrom,../install/index.html#flashrom}

@uref{index.html,Back to previous index}.

@node Form factor
@chapter Form factor
@anchor{#form-factor}
These boards use the SSI EEB 3.61 form factor; make sure that your case supports this. This form factor is similar to E-ATX in that the size is identical, but the position of the screws are different.

@node Flash chips
@chapter Flash chips
@anchor{#flash-chips}
These boards use LPC flash (not SPI), in a PLCC socket. The default flash size 1MiB (8Mbits), and can be upgraded to 2MiB (16Mbits). SST49LF080A is the default that the board uses. SST49LF016C is an example of a 2MiB (16Mbits) chip, which might work. It is believed that 2MiB (16Mbits) is the maximum size available for the flash chip.

@strong{DO NOT hot-swap the chip with your bare hands. Use a PLCC chip extractor. These can be found online. See @uref{http://www.coreboot.org/Developer_Manual/Tools#Chip_removal_tools,http://www.coreboot.org/Developer_Manual/Tools#Chip_removal_tools}}

@node Native graphics initialization
@chapter Native graphics initialization
@anchor{#native-graphics-initialization}
Native graphics initialization exists (XGI Z9s) for this board. Framebuffer- and text-mode both work. A serial port is also available.

@node Memory
@chapter Memory
@anchor{#memory}
DDR2 533/667 Registered ECC. 16 slots. Total capacity up to 64GiB.

@node Hex-core CPUs
@chapter Hex-core CPUs
@anchor{#hex-core-cpus}
PCB revision 1.05G is the best version of this board (the revision number will be printed on the board), because it can use dual hex-core CPUs (Opteron 2400/8400 series). Other revisions are believed to only support dual quad-core CPUs.

@node Current issues
@chapter Current issues
@anchor{#current-issues}
@itemize
@item
There seems to be a 30 second bootblock delay (observed by tpearson); the system otherwise boots and works as expected. See @uref{../resources/text/kfsn4-dre/bootlog.txt,kfsn4-dre/bootlog.txt} - this uses the 'simple' bootblock, while tpearson uses the 'normal' bootblock, which tpearson suspects may be a possible cause. This person says that they will look into it. @uref{http://review.coreboot.org/gitweb?p=board-status.git;a=blob;f=asus/kfsn4-dre/4.0-10101-g039edeb/2015-06-27T03:59:16Z/config.txt;h=4742905c185a93fbda8eb14322dd82c70641aef0;hb=055f5df4e000a97453dfad6c91c2d06ea22b8545,This config} doesn't have the issue.
@item
Text-mode is a bit jittery (but still usable). (the jitter disappears if using KMS, once the kernel starts. The jitter will remain, if booting the kernel in text-mode).
@end itemize

@node Other information
@chapter Other information
@anchor{#other-information}
@uref{ftp://ftp.sgi.com/public/Technical%20Support/Pdf%20files/Asus/kfsn4-dre.pdf,specifications}

Copyright © 2015 Francis Rowe <info@@gluglug.org.uk>@* Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license can be found at @uref{../resources/licenses/gfdl-1.3.txt,gfdl-1.3.txt}

Updated versions of the license (when available) can be found at @uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html,https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html}

UNLESS OTHERWISE SEPARATELY UNDERTAKEN BY THE LICENSOR, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE LICENSOR OFFERS THE LICENSED MATERIAL AS-IS AND AS-AVAILABLE, AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE LICENSED MATERIAL, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHER. THIS INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT KNOWN OR DISCOVERABLE. WHERE DISCLAIMERS OF WARRANTIES ARE NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS DISCLAIMER MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, IN NO EVENT WILL THE LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, NEGLIGENCE) OR OTHERWISE FOR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE, EXEMPLARY, OR OTHER LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS PUBLIC LICENSE OR USE OF THE LICENSED MATERIAL, EVEN IF THE LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES. WHERE A LIMITATION OF LIABILITY IS NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability.

@bye
