\input texinfo
@documentencoding UTF-8

@ifnottex
@paragraphindent 0
@end ifnottex
@titlepage
@title ASUS KGPE-D16 server/workstation board
@end titlepage

@node Top
@top ASUS KGPE-D16 server/workstation board

@menu
* ASUS KGPE-D16 server/workstation board::
* CPU compatibility::
* Board status compatibility::
* Form factor::
* IPMI iKVM module add-on::
* Flash chips::
* Native graphics initialization::
* Current issues::
@end menu

@node ASUS KGPE-D16 server/workstation board
@chapter ASUS KGPE-D16 server/workstation board
@anchor{#asus-kgpe-d16-serverworkstation-board}
This is a server board using AMD hardware (Fam10h @strong{and Fam15h} CPUs available). It can also be used for building a high-powered workstation. Powered by libreboot. The coreboot port was done by Timothy Pearson of @uref{https://raptorengineeringinc.com/,Raptor Engineering Inc.} and, working with Timothy (and sponsoring the work) merged into libreboot.

@strong{NOTE: This board is unsupported in libreboot 20150518. To use it in libreboot, for now, you must build for it from source using the libreboot git repository.}

@strong{Memory initialization is still problematic, for some modules. We recommend avoiding Kingston modules..}

Flashing instructions can be found at @uref{../install/index.html#flashrom,../install/index.html#flashrom} - note that external flashing is required (e.g. BBB), if the proprietary (ASUS) firmware is currently installed. If you already have libreboot, by default it is possible to re-flash using software running in GNU/Linux on the KGPE-D16, without using external hardware.

@uref{index.html,Back to previous index}.

@node CPU compatibility
@chapter CPU compatibility
@anchor{#cpu-compatibility}

@strong{Use Opteron 6200 series (works without microcode updates, including hw virt).}
6300 series needs microcode updates, so avoid those CPUs. 6100 series is too old, and mostly untested.

@uref{index.html,Back to previous index}.

@node Board status compatibility
@chapter Board status (compatibility)
@anchor{#board-status-compatibility}
See @uref{https://raptorengineeringinc.com/coreboot/kgpe-d16-status.php,https://raptorengineeringinc.com/coreboot/kgpe-d16-status.php}.

@node Form factor
@chapter Form factor
@anchor{#form-factor}
These boards use the SSI EEB 3.61 form factor; make sure that your case supports this. This form factor is similar to E-ATX in that the size is identical, but the position of the screws are different.

@node IPMI iKVM module add-on
@chapter IPMI iKVM module add-on
@anchor{#ipmi-ikvm-module-add-on}
Don't use it. It uses proprietary firmware and adds a backdoor (remote out-of-band management chip, similar to the @uref{http://libreboot.org/faq/#intelme,Intel Management Engine}. Fortunately, the firmware is unsigned (possibly to replace) and physically separate from the mainboard since it's on the add-on module, which you don't have to install.

@node Flash chips
@chapter Flash chips
@anchor{#flash-chips}
2MiB flash chips are included by default, on these boards. It's on a P-DIP 8 slot (SPI chip). The flash chip can be upgraded to higher sizes: 4MiB, 8MiB or 16MiB. With at least 8MiB, you could feasibly fit a compressed linux+initramfs image (BusyBox+Linux system) into CBFS and boot that, loading it into memory.

Libreboot has configs for 2, 4, 8 and 16 MiB flash chip sizes (default flash chip is 2MiB).

@strong{DO NOT hot-swap the chip with your bare hands. Use a P-DIP 8 chip extractor. These can be found online. See @uref{http://www.coreboot.org/Developer_Manual/Tools#Chip_removal_tools,http://www.coreboot.org/Developer_Manual/Tools#Chip_removal_tools}}

@node Native graphics initialization
@chapter Native graphics initialization
@anchor{#native-graphics-initialization}
Only text-mode is known to work, but linux(kernel) can initialize the framebuffer display (if it has KMS - kernel mode setting).

@node Current issues
@chapter Current issues
@anchor{#current-issues}
@itemize
@item
LRDIMM memory modules are currently incompatible
@item
SAS (via PIKE 2008 module) requires non-free option ROM (and SeaBIOS) to boot from it (theoretically possible to replace, but you can put a kernel in CBFS or on SATA and use that to boot GNU, which can be on a SAS drive. The linux kernel can use those SAS drives (via PIKE module) without an option ROM).
@item
IPMI iKVM module (optional add-on card) uses proprietary firmware. Since it's for remote out-of-band management, it's theoretically a backdoor similar to the Intel Management Engine. Fortunately, unlike the ME, this firmware is unsigned which means that a free replacement is theoretically possible. For now, the libreboot project recommends not installing the module. @uref{https://github.com/facebook/openbmc,This project} might be interesting to derive from, for those who want to work on a free replacement. In practise, out-of-band management isn't very useful anyway (or at the very least, it's not a major inconvenience to not have it).
@item
Graphics: only text-mode works. See @ref{#graphics,#graphics}
@end itemize

@menu
* Hardware specifications::
@end menu

@node Hardware specifications
@section Hardware specifications
@anchor{#hardware-specifications}
The information here is adapted, from the ASUS website.
@menu
* Processor / system bus::
* Core logic::
* Memory compatibility with libreboot::
* Expansion slots::
* Form factor::
* ASUS features::
* Storage::
* Networking::
* Graphics::
* On board I/O::
* Back I/O ports::
* Environment::
* Monitoring::
* Note::
@end menu

@node Processor / system bus
@subsection Processor / system bus
@anchor{#processor-system-bus}
@itemize
@item
2 CPU sockets (G34 compatible)
@item
HyperTransport™ Technology 3.0
@item
CPUs supported:
@itemize
@item
AMD Opteron 6100 series (Fam10h. No IOMMU support. @strong{Not} recommended - old. View errata datasheet here: @uref{http://support.amd.com/TechDocs/41322_10h_Rev_Gd.pdf,http://support.amd.com/TechDocs/41322_10h_Rev_Gd.pdf})
@item
AMD Opteron 6200 series (bulldozer cores) (Fam15h, with full IOMMU support in libreboot. @strong{highly recommended - fast, and works well without microcode updates, including virtualization})
@item
AMD Opteron 6300 series (piledriver cores) (Fam15h, with full IOMMU support in libreboot. @strong{AVOID LIKE THE PLAGUE - virtualization is broken without microcode updates}
@item
NOTE: 6300 series CPUs have buggy microcode built-in, and libreboot recommends avoiding the updates. The 6200 series CPUs have more reliable microcode.
Look at this errata datasheet: @uref{http://support.amd.com/TechDocs/48063_15h_Mod_00h-0Fh_Rev_Guide.pdf,http://support.amd.com/TechDocs/48063_15h_Mod_00h-0Fh_Rev_Guide.pdf}
(see Errata 734 - this is what kills the 6300 series)
@end itemize

@item
6.4 GT/s per link (triple link)
@end itemize

@node Core logic
@subsection Core logic
@anchor{#core-logic}
@itemize
@item
AMD SR5690
@item
AMD SP5100
@end itemize

@node Memory compatibility with libreboot
@subsection Memory compatibility (with libreboot)
@anchor{#memory-compatibility-with-libreboot}
@itemize
@item
@strong{Total Slots:} 16 (4-channel per CPU, 8 DIMM per CPU), ECC
@item
@strong{Capacity:} Maximum up to 256GB RDIMM
@item
@strong{Memory Type that is compatible:}
@itemize
@item
DDR3 1600/1333/1066/800 UDIMM*
@item
DDR3 1600/1333/1066/800 RDIMM*
@end itemize

@item
@strong{Compatible sizes per memory module:}
@itemize
@item
16GB, 8GB, 4GB, 3GB, 2GB, 1GB RDIMM
@item
8GB, 4GB, 2GB, 1GB UDIMM
@end itemize

@end itemize

@node Expansion slots
@subsection Expansion slots
@anchor{#expansion-slots}
@itemize
@item
@strong{Total slot:} 6
@item
@strong{Slot Location 1:} PCI 32bit/33MHz
@item
@strong{Slot Location 2:} PCI-E x16 (Gen2 X8 Link)
@item
@strong{Slot Location 3:} PCI-E x16 (Gen2 X16 Link), Auto switch to x8 link if slot 2 is occupied
@item
@strong{Slot Location 4:} PCI-E x8 (Gen2 X4 Link)
@item
@strong{Slot Location 5:} PCI-E x16 (Gen2 X16 Link)
@item
@strong{Slot Location 6:} PCI-E x16 (Gen2 X16 Link), Auto turn off if slot 5 is occupied, For 1U FH/FL Card, MIO supported
@item
@strong{Additional Slot 1:} PIKE slot (for SAS drives. See notes above)
@item
Follow SSI Location#
@end itemize

@node Form factor
@subsection Form factor
@anchor{#form-factor-1}
@itemize
@item
SSI EEB 3.61 (12"x13")
@end itemize

@node ASUS features
@subsection ASUS features
@anchor{#asus-features}
@itemize
@item
Fan Speed Control
@item
Rack Ready (Rack and Pedestal dual use)
@end itemize

@node Storage
@subsection Storage
@anchor{#storage}
@itemize
@item
@strong{SATA controller:}
@itemize
@item
AMD SP5100
@item
6 x SATA2 300MB/s
@end itemize

@item
@strong{SAS/SATA Controller:}
@itemize
@item
ASUS PIKE2008 3Gbps 8-port SAS card included
@end itemize

@end itemize

@node Networking
@subsection Networking
@anchor{#networking}
@itemize
@item
2 x Intel® 82574L + 1 x Mgmt LAN
@end itemize

@node Graphics
@subsection Graphics
@anchor{#graphics}
@itemize
@item
Aspeed AST2050 with 8MB VRAM
@end itemize

@node On board I/O
@subsection On board I/O
@anchor{#on-board-io}
@itemize
@item
1 x PSU Power Connector (24-pin SSI power connector + 8-pin SSI 12V + 8-pin SSI 12V power connector)
@item
1 x Management Connector , Onboard socket for management card
@item
3 x USB pin header , Up to 6 Devices
@item
1 x Internal A Type USB Port
@item
8 x Fan Header , 4pin (3pin/4pin fan dual support)
@item
2 x SMBus
@item
1 x Serial Port Header
@item
1 x TPM header
@item
1 x PS/2 KB/MS port
@end itemize

@node Back I/O ports
@subsection Back I/O ports
@anchor{#back-io-ports}
@itemize
@item
1 x External Serial Port
@item
2 x External USB Port
@item
1 x VGA Port
@item
2 x RJ-45
@item
1 x PS/2 KB/Mouse
@end itemize

@node Environment
@subsection Environment
@anchor{#environment}
@itemize
@item
@strong{Operation temperature:} 10C ~ 35C
@item
@strong{Non operation temperature:} -40C ~ 70C
@item
@strong{Non operation humidity:} 20% ~ 90% ( Non condensing)
@end itemize

@node Monitoring
@subsection Monitoring
@anchor{#monitoring}
@itemize
@item
CPU temperatures
@item
Fan speed (RPM)
@end itemize

@node Note
@subsection Note:
@anchor{#note}
@itemize
@item
* DDR3 1600 can only be supported with AMD Opteron 6300/6200 series processor
@end itemize

Copyright © 2015 Minifree Ltd <info@@minifree.org>@* Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts. A copy of the license can be found at @uref{../resources/licenses/gfdl-1.3.txt,gfdl-1.3.txt}

Updated versions of the license (when available) can be found at @uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html,https://www.gnu.org/licenses/licenses.html}

UNLESS OTHERWISE SEPARATELY UNDERTAKEN BY THE LICENSOR, TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, THE LICENSOR OFFERS THE LICENSED MATERIAL AS-IS AND AS-AVAILABLE, AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE LICENSED MATERIAL, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY, OR OTHER. THIS INCLUDES, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT, ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OR ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT KNOWN OR DISCOVERABLE. WHERE DISCLAIMERS OF WARRANTIES ARE NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS DISCLAIMER MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

TO THE EXTENT POSSIBLE, IN NO EVENT WILL THE LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, NEGLIGENCE) OR OTHERWISE FOR ANY DIRECT, SPECIAL, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE, EXEMPLARY, OR OTHER LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS PUBLIC LICENSE OR USE OF THE LICENSED MATERIAL, EVEN IF THE LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH LOSSES, COSTS, EXPENSES, OR DAMAGES. WHERE A LIMITATION OF LIABILITY IS NOT ALLOWED IN FULL OR IN PART, THIS LIMITATION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

The disclaimer of warranties and limitation of liability provided above shall be interpreted in a manner that, to the extent possible, most closely approximates an absolute disclaimer and waiver of all liability.

@bye
